

===== PDF PAGE 289 (printed ~280) =====
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
Preparing the Event Database 
Because of the Garbage-ln —► Garbage-Out rule, constructing the event 
database requires great care. Unlike some modem approaches which require a 
comprehensive life history to confirm psychological development, a rectification 
method based on medieval predictive astrology is simpler. With as few as ten or 
fifteen events it is possible to rectify a natal chart. Event types most conducive to 
timing by medieval techniques are emphasized in database construction. 
Chapter Summary 
Preferred Events for Data Collection. Because Mars always leaves his mark, 
Martian events are preferred. Saturn-signified events are not far behind. The 
emphasis on gathering events marked by Mars and Saturn in no way denies the 
influence of benefics during a person's lifetime. Yet events marked by malefics 
are the first to be remembered and usually the first to be told. Events of notoriety 
and other events impacting family members are also emphasized. 
Inclusion of Mundane Affairs in an Individual Event Database. Results of this 
study support the ability of natal figures for political leaders to time mundane 
events; yet it is easy to read mundane events into a natal figure where none exist, 
especially for a sitting political figure. For national political leaders, rectification 
should be based on events prior to their arrival on the national stage. 
Choosing and Reading Biographies. A non-partisan work containing 
accurately-timed dates is the first prerequisite for choosing a biography. Of 
additional interest are biographies based on access to material recently discovered 
or declassified. Besides culling as many dates as possible, qualitative information 
on the native's temperament, manners. Moon's significations, wealth, philosophy, 
and identification of life's major turning points all complement a purely event- 
driven database. 


===== PDF PAGE 290 (printed ~281) =====
282 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
Introduction to Rectification 
Historical Methods 
During the Medieval Era, three approaches to rectification were taken: 
Animodar, Pre-Natal Epoch, and Accidents of the Native. 
Animodar. In this technique, the Ascendant or Midheaven, whichever is closer, 
is made the degree of the al-mubtazz of the Syzygy Ante Navitatem (SAN). 
Pre-Natal Epoch. Sometimes referred to as the Trutine of Hermes, the Pre- 
Natal Epoch method assumes the position of the Ascendant and Moon are 
transposed at the time of conception. 
Accidents of the Native. The word Accidents is taken to mean the full range of 
events that happen to a person during life and does not have purely malefic 
connotations. Rectification by accidents is a purely empirical approach which 
matches actual life events to dates determined by specific predictive methods. 
Of the three methods, I have not studied, nor have researched, nor use either 
Animodar or Pre-Natal Epoch methods and have no comment on their viability. 
Working with an empirical approach, I have chosen Accidents of the Native as a 
preferred rectification method. 
Late Victorian Approach to Rectification 
Writing at the turn of the 20th century, two noted astrologers gave the following 
advice for rectifying birth times: 
Alfred John Pearce, in his Textbook of Astrology (1911, 203-204), wrote: 
Several methods have been propounded for rectifying approximate 
times of birth. The only true process is by computing arcs of primary 
direction for past events of importance - such as serious accidents, 
dangerous illness, death of father or mother, emigration, etc., - and 
comparing the arcs of such directions as may fall due near the periods 
of such events and harmonise with the nature of them... 
It is usually found that directions of Mars afford the most reliable 
means of rectifying an uncertain estimate of the birth-moment; 
especially in the case of an acute fever, or an accident causing much 
loss of blood, or necessitating a surgical operation, or the sudden 
death of a parent. 


===== PDF PAGE 291 (printed ~282) =====
CHAPTER 14 - PREPARING THE EVENT DATABASE 
283 
The date of marriage if already entered upon, will sometimes be useful 
to this end, especially in the case of a real love-match, of happy and 
advantageous nature; in such case a direction of Venus may fall a little 
earlier than the arc of marriage, thereby accounting for the fascination 
leading up to the engagement and wedding. 
W. J. Simmonite, in The Arcana of Astrology (1890,282), wrote: 
The best directions by which to rectify the estimated time of birth are 
those of the M.C. to Mars or the Sun, the Sun to parallels of Mars or 
the angles, as their effects do generally answer vety closely to the time 
of direction. Marriage, accident, and death of parents, are safe events 
by which to rectify. 
Locking down a birth time with events marked by malefics or the Sun. Other 
than the ability of the Moon to time marriage (not just Venus), I agree with Pearce 
and Simmonite's assertion that primary directions to the angles are the most 
reliable rectification method. As demonstrated in Appendices C and D, primary 
directions of Mars, Saturn or the Sun to the angles are the most common 
directions used to lock down birth times for the Presidential database. 
Primary Directions only one of many possible rectification techniques. Where 
I differ from Pearce and Simmonite is the apparent exclusivity assigned to primary 
directions as a rectification tool. As presented in Chapter 15: Three Stages of 
Rectification, a richer mix of techniques is recommended. From planetary period 
methods to Arabic Parts, there are multiple tools which can narrow the Ascendant 
to within 1-4 degrees of accuracy. It is at this point in the process where I believe 
primary directions are appropriate. In my opinion, to begin a rectification with 
primary directions, especially when a birth time is unknown, is akin to a surgeon 
using a scalpel when the patient has not had clothing removed, much less been 
shaved or washed. 
Emphasize events signified by malefics and the Sun in database construction. 
Pearce and Simmonite indicate the importance of events marked by Mars, Saturn, 
and Sun for rectification purposes. If these types of events are such reliable 
rectification inputs, then logically it makes sense to emphasize these events when 
constructing an event database. Taking these in turn, let's look at events marked 
by malefics and events of notoriety; not only for the individual but for other 
family members. 


===== PDF PAGE 292 (printed ~283) =====
284 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
Preferred Events for Data Collection 
Events Marked by Malefics. Because Mars always leaves his mark, events of a 
Martian nature are preferred. These include marital and legal disputes, home fires 
and burglaries, accidents, surgeries, illness, and death. Criminal activity, arrest, 
trial, and incarceration dates are also valuable though they are sometimes of 
Saturn's nature. Compiling this kind of list is akin to preparing a crime report for 
the evening news. This is not to deny the occurrence of pleasure, joy, and triumph 
in anyone's life. However like the evening news, events of a malefic nature have 
always been emphasized in collective memories, whether by a living client or 
those presented by a biographer written at a later time. They are the first to be 
remembered and - unless unusually traumatic - the first to be told. 
Events of Fame or Notoriety. Not just a career change but any event with a 
public connection is helpful. Events where the individual gains publicity or 
notoriety are also excellent choices when assembling an event database. While 
this category typically includes dates of major career changes, the more important 
thread is any type of event which connects the individual to the community. This 
can mean an art gallery opening, any mention in the public media, a publication 
date or book tour, making speeches to large audiences, or receiving recognition in 
front of a large number of people. Even the date a person was interviewed by a 
television crew can prove valuable. 
Both the Sun and Lunar Nodes can time publicity. Public events are timed by 
two methods. First are directions of the Sun to the angles. Second are transiting 
aspects or directions of the Lunar Nodes to the angles. While the literature has 
focused mostly on Sun directions, there are relatively few of these during a single 
lifetime. More frequent are transits of the Lunar Nodes to the angles. As 
demonstrated in Chapter 12, the Lunar Nodes time events which connect the 
native to the world-at-large for which public records are likely to exist. 
Events Impacting Family Members. Seldom do astrologers request events for 
family members other than deaths of parents or close relatives. Virtually any 
incident involving a family member is fodder for rectification testing, especially if 
the subject with unknown birth time is younger and has few events of their own 
available for testing. 
Events other than death can be timed bv Arabic Parts of Death. Family events 
can be used in conjunction with relevant Arabic Parts, including the Part of 
Mother, Part of Father, Part of Siblings, and Parts of Death for either Parents or 
Siblings. I will reiterate a comment made in Chapter 11 to not shy away from 
parts which include death in their naming. In some cases injuries and accidents 
occur when these parts are active, not death. 
Example: Part of Death of Siblings. As one example taken from a private 
client, the death of one sibling by car accident was timed by the solar arc direction 


===== PDF PAGE 293 (printed ~284) =====
CHAPTER 14 - PREPARING THE EVENT DATABASE 
285 
of Uranus to the Part of Death of Siblings. On another occasion, the transit of 
Mars to the same part timed a surgical operation for the other sibling. The transit 
of Mars did not kill the sibling; in fact surgery was successful. Yet Mars left his 
mark through surgery. Besides fire, cutting is an action assigned to Mars. 
Because measurements to various parts of death need not time death; injuries or 
problems of far less magnitude can be gathered for the event database. For 
example, incidents ranging from a broken arm to a bad insect sting are fodder for 
testing the Part of Death of Siblings. The same can be said for parental events. 
Using children^ events to rectify parental figures. The reverse is also true: 
events of the children can help rectify the parent's figure. Birth and premature 
death of children are always marked through parental figures. But it is possible to 
time other more subtle events. For John Adams, I propose that his son John 
Quincy Adam's trip to Paris to negotiate the end of the War of 1812 was timed by 
the direction of Mars trine MC in the father's natal figure. 
Including Mundane Affairs in an Event Database for Individual Nativities 
Q. Can a natal chart time mundane events? For heads of state and anyone who 
plays a role in mundane events, the question arises whether to include mundane 
affairs when trying to rectify the chart of a person. The answer to this question 
depends on the validity of the theory that one can time mundane affairs through a 
natal figure. Traditional authors are largely silent on this issue, preferring 
ingresses and other methods for mundane prediction. One exception is Ptolemy's 
recommendation to consider the angles and luminaries for a ruler's natal figure as 
one outlet for eclipses to manifest (Ptolemy 1822, 61). The 30 October 1845 solar 
eclipse in the natal Midheaven for James Polk and Zachary Taylor tied these two 
leaders directly to the Mexican War. This is one example which supports 
Ptolemy's argument (see Chapter 12: Lunar Nodes and Eclipses). 
A. Yes, but don't let mundane events overly skew a rectification. The 
conclusion of this study reaches further and confirms the connection between 
charts of American Presidents and world affairs. The ability of Mars in the 
figures of Polk, Wilson, and Eisenhower to time the outbreak of the Mexican War, 
WWI, and WWII respectively is an astounding feat of mundane synchronicity 
achieved by timing directions of Mars to the angles for natal figures. Still, one 
should not let mundane events skew the rectification process early on. It is easy to 
be swayed by reading mundane events into a political leader's figure where none 
exist. My recommendation is to base rectifications for national politicians 
primarily on family events or on political events leading up to service in a national 
office. To this end, there are a number of Presidential biographers who stop short 
of the Presidency. Sellers (1966), Morris (1990), and McCullough (2001) are 
examples. For cradle-to-grave biographies, one can also simply cut off the event 
database following nomination to national office. 


===== PDF PAGE 294 (printed ~285) =====
286 A RECTIF/CA TION MANUAL 
Examples of Mundane Events read through Presidential nativities. For those 
who wish to push the envelope on the inclusion of mundane events in the event 
database for political leaders, I have two suggestions. First is to consider protests, 
riots, and civil wars which can be timed by transits or directions of malefics to the 
4,h house cusp. Second is harm to or assassination of the President (usually the 
sitting President; occasionally a former President) which can be timed by transits 
or directions of malefics, planets in the 5lh, or planets ruling the 5th house; to the 
10,h house cusp which signifies the King. In addition, because the Sun signifies 
the King, sometimes directions of malefics to the Sun time the death of the head 
of state. Franklin Roosevelt's death read through Lyndon Johnson's Sun is one 
example of this type of direction. 
Table 23. Timing Mundane Events with Presidential Nativities 
Nativity 
Measurement/Event 
Date 
T. Jefferson 
REG. opposition MC c. => Saturn. 
Death of King George II 
20-Nov-1760 
26-Oct-1760 
J.Q. Adams 
PT. Mars (l=MA) c. => MC. 
Battle of Bunker Hill 
24-Apr-1774 
22-Apr-1774 
J. Tyler 
d.s.a. Saturn conjunct MC. 
Death of President William Harrison 
1-Apr-1841 
4-Apr-1941 
J. Polk 
c.s.a. MC conjunct Mars. 
Taylor defeats Santa Anna at Buena Vista 
22-Feb-1847 
23-Feb-1847 
A. Lincoln 
tr. Saturn conjunct IC. 
Death of President Zachary Taylor 
Lincoln's Eulogy on Taylor's death 
19-Jul-1850 
9-Jul-1850 
25-Jul-1850 
R. Hayes 
c.s.a. Saturn conjunct MC. 
Andrew Johnson Impeachment Vote 
Death of President James Buchanan 
18-Jun-1868 
16-May-1868 
l-Jun-1868 
C. Arthur 
tr. Jupiter conjunct MC (Jupiter rules 5th). 
Assassination of President James Garfield 
21-Jun-1881 
2-Jul-1881 
T. Roosevelt 
c. prog. Venus conjunct antiscion of MC. 
(within 15 minutes of degree, Venus rules 5th) 
(also c. tr. Venus same position) 
Assassination of McKinley 
6-Sep-1901 
J. Kennedy 
PT. MC d. => Saturn. 
President Warren Harding's death 
4-Aug-1923 
2-Aug-1923 
L.Johnson 
REG. opposition Sun c. => Saturn. 
Death of President Franklin Roosevelt 
30-Mar-1945 
12-Apr-1945 


===== PDF PAGE 295 (printed ~286) =====
CHAPTER 14 - PREPARING THE EVENT DATABASE 287 
What type of biography to choose for a Rectification project? 
The importance of accurately-dated events, a non-partisan tone, and recently 
uncovered facts. The first and foremost requirement for choosing a biography is 
finding one littered with dates. Second is finding a biography which is not overly 
partisan. Third is a biography based on access to private papers, letters, or official 
documents which have been unavailable to the public. Frequently a group of 
papers or documents is found or declassified some years after a President's death. 
This usually spurs increased interest in the President's life and often a new 
biography. Research of this type is also likely to help uncover the subtleties of 
delineation which can be difficult to crack if one limits research to relatively 
sanitized biographies which populate the internet. Needless to say, any research 
based on access to recently discovered material can prove very valuable. 
Treat the bias of memoirs with caution. Presidential memoirs and 
autobiographies of any kind should be treated cautiously. Often they are useful 
for providing dates considered too tedious for most biographers to include. I rate 
Eisenhower's memoirs highly in this regard; for example it's difficult to find the 
critical events and dates of the Suez Crisis better summarized in a single source. 
However, most memoirs are limited by their biased selectivity which highlights 
events favorable to the author. Generally what is left out is of greater interest. 
Campaign biographies are another type of book unique to studying the American 
Presidency. Unless if working with Presidential candidates (whose campaign 
biographies are often the only background available to the general public) 
campaign biographies are to be avoided at all costs. 
How to Read a Biography for a Rectification Project 
In addition to gathering as many events as possible, there are several types of 
purely descriptive data which are helpful to gather when reading biographies. 
Temperament and Manners. Look for succinct statements of personality and 
the individual's mental process. All good biographers take time away from the 
chronology of their subject's life to comment on personality, character, and 
mental style. These observations are helpful to confirm the Ascendant and the 
assessment of temperament. 
Moon's significations (Mother and/or Wife). Gain enough understanding of the 
Moon, usually significator of the Mother or Wife, so that the Moon's sign, bound, 
and dwad can be established early on. Determining the degree of the Moon is one 
of the first steps taken in rectification and this descriptive data can help confirm it. 
Wealth and Philosophy. Gather evidence which can support the sign and house 
placement of both the Part of Fortune and Part of Spirit. Environmentalists often 
have their Part of Spirit of Virgo or Cancer; capitalists in Taurus or Capricorn; 
politicians in Aries or Leo; intellectuals in Gemini or Libra. With the Part of 


===== PDF PAGE 296 (printed ~287) =====
288 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
Fortune, evidence showing the house placement is usually more evident than sign 
position. For example, does the individual obtain easy credit because of his own 
integrity? (POF in 1st - H. Hoover). Does the individual use banks and debt as 
their primary financial vehicle? (POF in 8th - F. Roosevelt). Does the individual 
use secret methods to finance activities? (POF in 12th - R. Nixon). 
Identify Maior Life Events. Always watch for events which biographers 
describe as turning points in life. Sometimes they are referred to as signal dates 
or are similarly emphasized. Frequently biographers organize their work into 
chapters or sections based on these major events. They can be used to confirm 
planetary periods like those used in Directing by Triplicity and Fidaria. 
Fidaria periods are usually easy to match against major life events. Even 
before starting to read a biography, 1 like to determine the correct Fidaria 
Sequence by performing a few simple tests. Having the correct Fidaria Sequence 
in hand allows me to read a biography and cross reference events to the Fidaria 
periods simultaneously. Sometimes I literally hold the book 1 am reading in one 
hand and a printout of Fidaria periods in the other. Reading a biography in this 
manner allows me to match Fidaria periods to life events while I read; as a result, 
I gain an increased awareness of planetary behavior in action. In every case, 1 
learn valuable information about planetary rulership, which houses are stressed, 
and which houses are relatively care-free. Often a preliminary figure with correct 
signs on the angles can be made purely by the understanding achieved by 
matching life patterns to Fidaria Main and subperiods obtained while reading a 
biography. 
The End Result 
The final event database contains a chronological list of events, dates, event 
descriptions, qualitative descriptions of parents, wife, siblings, and children; and 
insights to the person's appearance, temperament, mental style, financial 
activities, and philosophy and/or religious practice. 1 suggest collecting this data 
in a computer spreadsheet where it can be sorted and otherwise manipulated. 
Depending on the level of detail in the biography written, one should easily 
generate a list of 100 dates. Multivolume and single volume biographies in excess 
of 1000 pages may yield upwards of 300 events. Together with written 
commentary, the size of spreadsheets can range from 700 up to 2000+ rows. For 
this study, the Presidential Database includes well over 50,000 rows of event data. 
