

===== PDF PAGE 297 (printed ~288) =====
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
The Three Stages of Rectification 
Rectification is best thought of as a mathematical optimization problem. A 
common feature to all optimizations is sensitivity to initial conditions. What this 
means is the correct solution is more likely to be achieved if initial parameters are 
reasonably close to the final solution before the optimization actually begins. The 
same principle applies to rectification. A three-stage rectification method is 
proposed which matches each technique to a commensurate level of robustness 
appropriate for each rectification stage. 
Chapter Summary 
Stage I: Determine the Ascendant Sign. Planetary period techniques, including 
Fidaria and Directing by Triplicity, are relatively robust methods which allow 
large blocks of time to be culled from the day of birth. Determination of the 
Moon's sign and her separation and application to other planets is another robust 
method which can significantly narrow the birth time range. Once the Ascendant 
is narrowed to a few possible signs, both physiognamy and general delineation 
techniques are used to narrow the Ascendant choice to a single sign. 
Stage 11: Determine the Ascendant's ranee within 1-4 degrees. Both 
physiognamy and dynamic measurements to the angles further specify the 
Ascendant to a range of ten degrees or less. It is at this point when Arabic Parts 
are deployed to narrow the Ascendant's range to 4 degrees or less. Iterating 
Ascendant Profections is also useful at this stage. 
Stage 111: Determine the exact Degree and Minute of the Ascendant. Primary 
directions, primary direction sequences, and solar arc directions are the scalpels of 
the rectification toolbox designed to finalize the Ascendant's exact degree and 
minute. Confirmation of a suitable arcus vitae is the final rectification step. 
A Miscellany of Tricks and Traps concludes the chapter. It includes a 
discussion for choosing magical times for conducting rectification projects. 


===== PDF PAGE 298 (printed ~289) =====
290 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
Treating Rectification as a Mathematical Optimization 
Sensitivity to initial conditions. Above all one must consider rectification a 
mathematical optimization process. Like all optimizations, rectification is 
sensitive to initial conditions. Consider a vast moonscape filled with craters, pits, 
and hidden tunnels as an analogy to the rectification problem. Each surface 
depression or opening represents a possible rectification solution. Many holes 
may appear promising yet only one will lead to the correct answer which lies 
below the surface, connected to the surface by some optimal path. The process 
itself is like throwing a ball across the moonscape and hoping it lands in the 
correct hole. With the permutations of transits, progressions, directions, and their 
different mathematical aspects, it is easy to find at least some fit for any hole. The 
trick then is to start near the optimal hole by identifying the correct crater from the 
outset. One is less likely to go astray if the starting point is reasonably close. One 
simply can't see the right hole if it is located in some other out-of-sight crater 
1000 or 3000 feet away. Finding some event matches for a particular time may 
cause too much time spent in the wrong place - literally throwing the ball round 
and around the surface of the wrong crater! 
Proper attribution of planetary behavior to life events requires accurate 
delineation. For example, suppose one observes a client's punctuality, tidiness of 
dress, and attention to detail. These are the characteristics of Virgo. Suppose the 
trial chart has no planets in Virgo so Virgo is assumed a trial Ascendant. Some 
event matches are found consistent with a Virgo Ascendant and a trial time is 
computed. But has the rectification really started in the correct crater? Suppose 
that the detail of Virgo manifests through the dwad position of the Moon or Sun in 
Virgo? Then the rectification has fallen victim to the trap of anchoring, sticking 
with some initial notion which unfairly biases the entire rectification. How to 
avoid anchoring? Delineation, Delineation, Delineation! 
The Rectification Process in Brief 
The proposed three stage rectification progressively resolves the choice of birth 
time to the exact degree and minute of the zodiac rising on the Eastern horizon at 
birth. Both the Ascendant and Midheaven are the two most important angles for 
use in rectification. 
Stage 1: Determine the Ascendant Sign. The goal of Stage I is to correctly 
choose the Ascendant sign through testing robust planetary period techniques, 
identifying the Moon's configuration, creating a figure whose planet placement is 
consistent with life patterns, and physiognamy. 
Stage II: Determine the Ascendant's range within 1-4 degrees. Narrowing the 
Ascendant to a tight range is the most time consuming part of the rectification 
process. Physiognamy of the rising decan, Arabic Parts, and Ascendant 
Profections are recommended tools for this stage. 


===== PDF PAGE 299 (printed ~290) =====
CHAPTER 15 - THREE STAGES OF RECTIFICATION 291 
Stage 111: Determine the exact Degree and Minute of the Ascendant. Primary 
directions, primary direction sequences, and solar arc directions are tools used to 
fine tune the Ascendant. Identification of a suitable arcus vitae provides final 
confirmation of the rectified Ascendant. 
Where does one begin? 
Depending on the quality of birth data, the practicing astrologer may choose to 
begin the rectification process with any one of the three stages. What types of 
birth data does the astrologer face? In general, four types of data are encountered: 
1. Date but no time. This is relatively common for historical figures, older 
generations still living, or individuals who by reason of immigration, warfare, or 
other displacement no longer have access to official birth times. 
2. Date and approximate time of day, such as late at night, sunrise, or before 
lunch. Biographers often provide these indications for historical subjects, saving 
astrologers from working completely blind. 
3. Date and exact - but suspicious - birth certificate time. Just because the time 
of 1:15 PM or 3:00 AM appears on a birth certificate does not mean it is accurate. 
Whenever birth times are rounded to the nearest 10, 15, 30 or 60 minute interval, 
one has good reason to be suspicious that for whatever reason the exact birth time 
was not recorded. What kind of reasons? Incorrect clock settings, insufficient 
nursing staff on duty, lack of attentiveness by nursing staff and complications at 
birth which demand immediate medical attention are the most common causes for 
incorrect birth time notations. In virtually all cases rounded times are off, in some 
cases as much as 20 or 30 minutes based on my experience! 
4. Date and exact birth certificate time. When one finds 2:23 PM or 5:51 PM 
recorded on a birth certificate, one can be reasonably certain that a nurse was 
watching the clock. There is still room for error, but it is generally very small. 
From my experience, these observations are often slightly late by 0-90 seconds. 
Caution: When Mercury is Retrograde or Combust. Irrespective of whether a 
birth time is rounded or not; whenever Mercury is retrograde or combust one must 
be suspicious of the birth time. The ability of Mercury retrograde periods to 
disrupt communications is common knowledge among even armchair astrologers. 
Yet few have made the connection between Mercury-retrograde and errors in 
recording birth times. The same can be said for times when Mercury is near the 
Sun, making his actions hidden. In one case, I rectified an official birth time of 
5:32 AM to 5:22:30 AM. It appears the official birth time should have been 5:23 
AM but someone transposed the digits from 5:23 to 5:32. The additional 
difference between 5:23:00 and 5:22:30 is within the normal range of error for an 
accurate birth time. Mercury was under the beams in this example. 


===== PDF PAGE 300 (printed ~291) =====
292 
A RECTIFICAT/ON MANUAL 
What is the True Birth Time? So what actually constitutes the birth time? I 
have personally never witnessed a live birth. From what other astrologers have 
reported, while the birth process is generally quite fast, there remains an interval 
of time between the appearance of the head, the first breath, and the severing of 
the umbilical cord; any one of which can be argued as the true birth time. I can 
only state that empirical events timed by directions to the angles are the only 
decisive proof of the empirical birth time. What this means is not until an 
individual has lived for 5, 10, or even 15 years might there be sufficient evidence 
using primary directions to determine the true birth time. 
Choosing the Initial Rectification Stage. For the first three types of data - day 
but no time, day but approximate time, and day with exact but suspicious time - I 
recommend beginning with Stage I rectification procedures. For the fourth type 
of data - date and exact birth certificate time - one may immediately jump in with 
primary directions, primary direction sequences, and solar arc directions as 
outlined in Stage III. Even for these cases, some Stage II Arabic Part testing is 
still recommended. 
One Shortcut worth Trying First 
Illness/Death of native or female family members. Before introducing Stage I, 
let me mention one shortcut which for about 5% of cases studied was able to 
achieve an Ascendant accurate within 1 degree in just a few minutes of work. If 
the event database contains 4-6 events including one or more major illnesses 
and/or death for the native, mother, grandmother, wife, sister, and/or daughter; 
often the Moon's position can be accurately determined because most of these 
events are timed by afflictions to the Moon. For illnesses and/or death of the 
native, this occurs whether or not the Moon is the actual hllaj because the Moon 
remains the universal significator of the physical body. For illnesses of other 
female family members, this guideline works because female family members are 
often read through the Moon in the native's figure. Even when females are 
signified by Venus, not the Moon, the stress of family illnesses often marks the 
native's own Moon indirectly. 
Determine the Moon's trial degree. Measurements like these, even if just a 
transit, can offer provide a clue to the Moon's true degree. With these types of 
events in hand, I use the quad-wheel software function to examine dynamic planet 
positions for each event. I recommend flipping back and forth between direct and 
converse motion for as many events as possible, noting degree positions of planets 
which are most likely cause of the affliction. See if a common degree can be used 
for the Moon's trial position. South Node transits are very useful in this step. 


===== PDF PAGE 301 (printed ~292) =====
CHAPTER 15 - THREE STAGES OF RECTIFICATION 
293 
Stage I: Determine the Ascendant Sign 
Correct Day and Year. As obvious as it sounds, there are some instances when 
even the birthday of a historical figure is in question. Woodrow Wilson gave his 
birthday as 28 December even though the family Bible recorded 29 December 
12:45 AM as the birth time. The latter proved accurate in testing. A variation of 
this problem occurs for births occurring near midnight. Compared to James 
Madison's official birthday of 16 March 1751 occurring near midnight, my 
proposed rectification is 15 March 1751, 11:23:48 PM, just shy of midnight. In 
these cases, I believe some flexibility must be allowed for a day either side of the 
official birth date. Finally there are examples of outright lies. Out of sheer vanity, 
Chester Arthur, bom 5 October 1829, changed his birth year to 1830 sometime 
between 1870 and 1880. The birth year of 1829 is correct (Reeves 1975, 5). 
Fidaria: Establishing the Sun's position above or below the horizon. Because 
Fidaria sequences differ for diumal and nocturnal births, they effectively divide 
the day into two halves. Matching major life periods to either the diumal or 
nocturnal sequence is usually so evident that it makes sense to begin with a 
Fidaria sequence comparison when the birth time is unknown. There is no better 
way to cull invalid blocks of time. Choosing a diumal sequence leaves only times 
between sunrise and sunset for consideration, a reduction on average of 50% of 
the hours of the day; for the nocturnal sequence, vice versa. 
Getting the Planets in the correct signs. For most cases this step involves 
choosing the Moon's correct sign; yet other planets, usually Mercury, Venus, or 
the Sun, may be positioned at the 30th or 1st degree of a sign and need to be double 
checked. For the Presidential database, this condition was met in 7 of 42 cases. 
Table 24 considers planets in the 30th or 1st degrees of signs with actual zodiacal 
degree positions taken from proposed rectifications. Delineation of the planet in 
the actual sign is contrasted with the planet in the adjacent sign. In some cases, 
such as Hoover where the Ingress of Mercury to Leo confirms a birth time no 
earlier than 10:27 p.m., much of the day's hours can be dismissed as rectification 
possibilities. 


===== PDF PAGE 302 (printed ~293) =====
294 A RECTIF/CA TION MANUAL 
Table 24. Planets in the 30th or 1st Degrees of Signs 
President 
Planet 
Delineation Notes 
G. Washington 
Venus 29P111 
Interest in luxury goods is Venus/Pisces 
not the lust of Venus/Aries. 
F. Pierce 
Mercury 29SC44 
Vindictive diplomats (e.g., Ostend) are 
Mercury in Scorpio not Sagittarius. 
J. Buchanan 
Venus 00GE15 
Reputation as entertainer and as writer of 
frequent correspondence matches 
Venus/Gemini as love of talk. 
J. Garfield 
Mercury 00SA50 
Dreaminess and accidents from falling 
(including falling overboard 14 times 
during a canal boat ride at age 16) is 
Mercury in Sagittarius not Scorpio. 
C. Coolidge 
Mars 00CA09 
Coolidge's timid, yet delayed forceful 
response during the Boston Police Strike 
matches Mars/Cancer not Mars/Gemini 
which would make Coolidge much more 
of a risk taker and debater. 
H. Hoover 
Mercury 00LE01 
Earliest profession in gold mine 
management is Mercury in Leo not Cancer 
Moon's Sign and Aspects. With an average motion of 13.2 degrees per day and 
30 degrees in each zodiacal sign, the odds of two possible Moon signs for a single 
day are high. There are two methods to narrow the Moon's degree range. 
Delineation. Identity the Moon's sign, bound, and dwad. See Chapter 1: 
Planets in Signs for the theoretical basis for this approach. For additional 
examples which demonstrate the influence of bound and dwad, see Appendix A. 
Prediction. Match the Moon's separation and application to long-term patterns 
of life development. Use aphorisms by Matemus, Pearce, and others as a 
baseline. Remember to customize their observations to the nativity at hand by 
respecting the actual zodiacal state of each planet involved in the Moon's 
configuration. Chapter 6: Temporal Indicators includes a case study of selecting 
of Franklin Pierce's Moon position using this approach. 
Basic Configuration of the Chart. The effects of beneflcs and malefics placed 
in houses are so strong that their effects are hard to miss. Good health yet a 
childless marriage? Not if the trial rectification shows Jupiter in the 5,h. Try 
moving Jupiter to the 6th house and see if a malefic moves to the 5th by position or 
rulership. More so than any other rectification method, matching the basic 
configuration of the chart to the native's life requires expertise in delineation. The 
Jupiter-S^-children is but one example. There are endless others. A military 
leader? Look for Mars in the 7th or 10th. Wealthy? Look for the Part of Fortune 


===== PDF PAGE 303 (printed ~294) =====
CHAPTER 15 - THREE STAGES OF RECTIFICATION 
295 
ruled and aspected by strong benefics. Multiple marriages? Look for a mutable 
sign on the T"
1 cusp. No religious affiliation? Look for Mars in or ruling the 9th 
house. Good health? Watch for Venus, Jupiter, or the North Node in the 6th 
house. Even the Part of Fortune in the 6th can ameliorate the effects of an empty 
house ruled by a malefic. The possibilities are endless. 
Physiognamv. Matching the Ascendant sign to physical appearance based on 
physiognomy is a method I picked up towards the end of this project. In theory, 
the physical appearance of an individual's face should allow a specific ten degree 
sign subdivision to be selected as the Ascendant range based on the physiognamy 
characteristics of the decans. In practice, there are a number of exceptions which 
make this a risky first step in rectification. 
First is the Moon's ability to alter physiognomy no matter where she is located 
in the figure. Because the Moon is the significator of the body; as the Sun is to 
spirit, the Moon always leaves her mark on the physical body and temperament. 
Second is the ability of a multiple planet stellium to dominate physiognomy no 
matter where the stellium appears in the figure. Warren Harding is an excellent 
example of this exception. His heavy contrasting eyebrows and the eagle shape of 
his nose are a classic Scorpio signature. Yet his Ascendant is Sagittarius. The 
exception is caused by a four planet Scorpio stellium; for Harding, in the 12th 
house (WS). Anyone choosing Scorpio as Harding's Ascendant based on 
physiognomy would anchor the rectification on a false assumption. 
To avoid making rectification errors with physiognomy, 1 suggest two tactics. 
First is to narrow the Ascendant to not more than two or three possible signs by 
first determining the correct Fidaria sequence, the Moon's sign, and the Moon's 
separation and application to other planets by aspect. At this point, the odds of 
making a mistake because of physiognomy's exceptions are greatly reduced. 
Second is to determine the Ascendant through other means in Stage I and wait 
until Stage II before attacking the figure with physiognomy. At this point, one can 
narrow the Ascendant based on the decans. 
Sources for physiognomy. There has not been a significant book published on 
decans in many years. At this point, I can offer nothing better than the 
recommendation to search an online bookseller using decans or decanates as 
keywords. Of books I have reviewed, I recommend Anrias (1938) whose 
composite illustrations of each of the 36 decan types were uncannily accurate in 
practice. Barrett (1941) and Hill (1997) are also useful. 
One of the key principles of decans in astrology is the influence of the decan's 
element, e.g., whether cardinal, fixed, or mutable. Cardinal decans, such as the 
second decan of Gemini assigned to Libra, manifest their outgoing nature by a 
forward-leaning facial profile. Viewing the head in profile, it appears the head's 
profile can literally fit in the outline of the shape of an arrow head with the nose 


===== PDF PAGE 304 (printed ~295) =====
296 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
leading the way. This is but one of many examples of how physiognamy can be 
used to confirm the Ascendant's rising decan. 
Triplicitv Rulers of the Angles. Directing by Triplicity can be used to confirm 
signs on the angles. See if a test can be constructed based on planetary strength 
which can confirm or invalidate rulership of the angles. For example, in final 
years Saturn rules the fiery triplicity; Jupiter, the airy triplicity. Suppose the trial 
figure places Leo on the MC, one of three fire signs ruled by Saturn in final years. 
For this hypothetical figure, Saturn is in poor state; Jupiter is in good state. 
Confronted with the fact that the native - age 60 - is universally loved, a 
humanitarian, and a successful corporate executive does not match Saturn ruling 
the 10th in final years as participating triplicity ruler of fire. The angles on this 
figure are wrong. Usually there are sufficient differences between planets in each 
figure to construct this type of test: another might be choosing between an earth or 
air sign for the MC in middle years based on Venus or Saturn as diurnal triplicity 
rulers for a nocturnal figure. 
From my experience, the validity of Directing by Triplicity is just as 
significant, but more subtle than Fidaria. In most cases, reading a full-length 
biography was required to sort out effects attributable to both methods. When 
making a rectification based on limited biographical details, as I do in Chapter 16; 
Rectification Case Studies, I pass over Directing by Triplicity as a rectification 
tool. 
Stage II: Determine the Ascendant's range within 1-4 degrees 
Entering Stage II with only the Ascendant sign known, there are two steps to 
further specify the Ascendant's range. The first step narrows the Ascendant to a 
range of ten degrees or less using physiognamy and dynamic measurements to the 
angles. The second step makes use of Arabic Parts and profections to narrow the 
Ascendant's range to within 1-4 degrees. 
Physiognamy. As stated above, in some cases it's best to wait until Stage 11 
before applying rules of physiognamy to narrow the Ascendant to a ten degree 
range based on the rising decan. 
Dynamic Measurements to the Angles. If unable to confidently secure the 
rising decan through physiognamy, one can check for transits, progressions, and 
solar arc directions to the angles. This is the approach recommended by most 
contemporary sources including Tyl (2001). As demonstrated with Andrew 
Jackson's chimney fire which opened Part II, this approach falls flat if 
measurements relate to an Arabic Part and not one of the angles. Still one cannot 
entirely ignore insights from this method. 
Recalling the ability of the Lunar Nodes to connect the native to the public, I 
recommend emphasizing transits of the Lunar Nodes to the angles to time major 


===== PDF PAGE 305 (printed ~296) =====
Chapter 15 - three stages of rectification 
297 
life events. In some cases, Nodal transits allow refinement of the Ascendant to 
within a few minutes of degree during Stage II rectification. These moments are 
rare but they do occur. For example, see how accurately transits of the Nodes to 
the Ascendant timed John Wesley's 24 May 1738 conversion in Chapter 16. 
Arabic Parts. Testing events against Arabic Parts is the bread and butter of 
Stage II rectification. It is best to have the Ascendant narrowed to ten degrees or 
less before testing Arabic Parts; otherwise one feels as if looking for a needle in a 
haystack. The ability of the eye and brain to iterate differences between planet 
positions and Arabic Parts is compromised if the differences are too great. 
Consider trying to iterate which Ascendant minimizes the error of these three 
observations: 
4 degrees between Jupiter and the antiscion of the Part of Marriage, 
3 degrees from the square of Mars and the Part of Illness/Accidents, 
5 degrees between Saturn and the contra-antiscion of the Part of Death. 
Now reconsider the same exercise if the 4, 3, and 5 degree differences were 
instead 15, 22, and 25. This case with wider measurements is virtually impossible 
for the brain to iterate much less sort out. 
For this study, the most common events tested against Arabic Parts were: 
Accidents, Illness, and Death of Parents and Siblings 
Marriage and death of Spouse 
Birth and Death of Children 
Accidents and Surgeries 
Real Estate: purchases, sales, loss (fire or theft) 
Native's Death 
See Chapters 11 and 16 for examples of both solar return planet aspects and 
dynamic activity to Arabic Parts which can narrow the Ascendant to 1-4 degrees. 
Profected Ascendant. Because the profected Annual Ascendant moves 30 
degrees per year, its movement of 12.175 days per one degree is sufficiently 
robust for Stage II rectification. Because the profected Ascendant aspects the 
same planets on the same date every year, I recommend watching for anniversary 
events with similar planetary significations. This exercise requires an extensive 
database of events in order to spot these periodic repetitions. One example is 
James Garfield whose Ascendant profection to Mars on 8 April each year timed: 
12-Apr-1861. Profected Ascendant sextile Mars. Outbreak of Civil War. 
6/7-Apr-1862. Profected Ascendant square Mars. Battle of Shiloh. 
14-Apr-1865. Profected Ascendant opposed Mars. Lincoln assassination. 


===== PDF PAGE 306 (printed ~297) =====
298 
/I RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
Note the ability of the profected Ascendant to time these events with an error of 
6 days or less implies an Ascendant accurate to 30 minutes of degree. 
To confess, because of the nonexistence of any software which includes 
profections in their rectification module, I did not use iterations of the Profected 
Ascendant for this rectification project. Had software allowed, my story here 
would differ. Until such software is developed, one can either create a customized 
spreadsheet model or simply train the eye to calculate the profected Ascendant's 
position without the aid of software. 
Stage III: Determine the exact Degree and Minute of the Ascendant 
Primary Directions. Starting with directing direct, begin to test primary 
directions against the event database. Here are a few tips to consider: 
Focus on directions of the Sun, Mars, and Saturn to the Ascendant and 
Midheaven. Chapter 14: Preparing the Event Database opened with observations 
by Pearce and Simmonite which emphasized the consistency of these directions 
for rectification. It's a point which cannot be overemphasized. 
Planets close to the Midheaven are most likely to signify parental events in 
youth. Exceptions include figures when the native lives out some mundane event 
through the natal figure, such as the Battle of Bunker Hill timed by the Mars - 
MC direction for John Quincy Adams. 
When planets are angular (any angle - 1st, 4th, 7th, or 10,h), events of interest are 
most likely to occur when the directed planet aspects the angle by sextile or trine, 
depending on whether the angle is in a sign of long or short ascension. Because 
the modem psychological assumption that development requires a hard aspect to 
occur, many practicing astrologers discount the ability of soft aspects to time 
events through directions. As explained in Chapter 8: Directions and 
Progressions, this notion is a completely false. Sextiles and trines can cause 
havoc - even death - just as well as any hard aspect. Ignore them at your perill 
Primary Direction Sequences. In my opinion, the discovery of primary 
direction sequences is the most significant technical advancement reported by this 
study. The odds that a pair of events, often a year apart of more, can be timed by 
the same direction computed with and without latitude are so low that primary 
direction sequences can effectively lock down a rectified birth time to within a 
fraction of a single second of time. This level of accuracy is unheard of in 
astrological circles yet possible with primary direction sequences. 
The trick in confirming primary direction sequences is to first discard any 
notion the orb surrounding a primary direction to the angles may last several 
months or a year. This is not correct. Replace this notion with the recognition 
that directions to the angles for a reliably timed birth chart occur within a few 


===== PDF PAGE 307 (printed ~298) =====
Chapter i 5 - three stages of rectification 
299 
days, often within 48 hours. Any continued effects after a primary direction, 
mistakenly ascribed to some kind of orb, are properly attributed to the elapsed 
time between the first and last direction defined by the primary direction 
sequence. Once the sequence is kicked off from an initial event, often similar 
events continue to occur until the last direction closes the sequence. 
Remember that one is looking for pairs of events when testing for sequences. 
At the beginning of Stage III, establish the length of a sequence by computing a 
pair of planet-angle directions with and without latitude. Do this for several 
planet pairs. Complete this step and try to identify pairs of events which conform 
to the computed sequence lengths. 
For an example of the level of minutiae involved in testing primary direction 
sequences, see comments for Benjamin Franklin's Stage III rectification in 
Chapter 16, pp. 342-343. 
Solar Arc Directions. Solar arc directions are just as accurate as primary 
directions, yet they are incapable of measuring certain types of events. For 
instance, there is no evidence that solar arc directions independently time death. 
This is a consistent finding for the Presidential database and confirms that primary 
directions occupy a higher rung on the predictive hierarchy. The other finding, 
listed as a proposition in Chapter 8: Directions and Progressions, is the possible 
connection between solar arc directions and public events which may only 
indirectly involve the native. Recall the solar arc direction of Mars to the 7th cusp 
timed Pearl Harbor for Eisenhower, yet the primary direction of Mars to the 7th 
timed his own personal involvement in military engagements as a direct result of 
Pearl Harbor. Accordingly, events timed by solar arc directions may have a more 
nature to their manifestation than primary directions. 
Arcus vitae. The last word in any rectification project is confirmation of the 
arcus vitae. Be aware that there are many exceptions to theory in choice of hllaj 
and killing planets. 


===== PDF PAGE 308 (printed ~299) =====
300 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
A Miscellany of Tricks and Traps 
All events are not recorded. Even the most carefully constructed databases 
omit events which would otherwise be helpful for rectification. Why? Two 
reasons. First, the event may not have been recorded for reasons including 
embarrassment, secrecy, or sloppy record keeping. Second, the event may have 
occurred but was not mentioned by a biographer. It may have manifested through 
other people read through the individual's figure. This is very common for the 
Moon who can signify the grandmother, aunt, mother, wife, sister, or daughter. If 
not reported by the biographer, there is no way to confirm the direction. 
Attack multiple events with a variety of rectification techniques. Avoid the 
error of anchoring a rectification on two or three events based on familiar or 
favorite techniques. Employ the full battery of predictive methods to confirm a 
rectification. Directions and transits to the angles are helpful but not the end of 
the story. As stated time and time again, Arabic Parts are more accurate. Do solar 
return planets highlight Arabic Parts? Do transits, progressions, and solar arc 
directions highlight a relevant Arabic Part and not an angle? 
Do Triplicity rulers of the angles confirm major changes in life purpose, 
finance, or career? And although I have highlighted triplicity rulers of the 
Ascendant and Midheaven, remember this technique applies to all signs, planets, 
cusps, and parts. Do not ignore the influence of triplicity rulers on the Part of 
Fortune. 
When planets are hidden. Effects of planets are often hidden when either 
combust or in the 12th house. In my experience, significations of 12th house 
planets are especially difficult to observe when testing directions against even the 
best constructed event databases. 
.t 
Jefferson is a good example. I delineate Venus/Taurus/12 as his slave 
mistress Sally Hemings whose rumored identity was settled only by DNA 
evidence released in 1998, a full 172 years following Jefferson's death. Only 
because Jefferson was a public figure did scrutiny cause the truth to be known. 
For lesser figures, the significations of 12th house planets may be forever hidden. 
Even some individuals cannot identify nor understand planets in the 12th, even 
when confronted with their delineation by an astrologer in a private counseling 
session. This is especially true when 12th house planets do not rule the 
Ascendant's sign, triplicity, bound, or dwad nor aspect the Ascendant's ruler. 
Universal significations of Sun and Moon, Remember because the Moon 
signifies the physical body and Sun the spirit, dynamic measurements to the Moon 
can time illness whether or not the Moon is the hilaj. In cases where the Sun is 
the true hTlaj, afflictions to a combination of the Sun, Moon, or Ascendant can 
time physical illness and death. 


===== PDF PAGE 309 (printed ~300) =====
CHAPTER 15 - THREE STAGES OF RECTIFICATION 
301 
Focus on directions to the Ascendant and Midheaven. Avoid paralysis of 
working with too many significators. Focus on the Ascendant and Midheaven. 
After refining a birth time to a range of a few minutes, only at this point introduce 
alternative angles such as the Equatorial Ascendant or Vertex when testing 
directions. 
Let it rest. After making a trial rectification, let it rest overnight. See if it holds 
up after a good night's sleep and a cup of morning coffee. If working with a 
living client, identify directions due in the next year which can be monitored to 
test the rectification on an out-of-sample basis. 
Magical times. Recently an entire book was written on connections between 
the time established for an astrological consultation and dynamic measurements 
between natal figures of both the astrologer and client (Sellars & Newman 2000). 
Can the same be said for rectification? Are astrologers driven to study and 
research certain figures, be they clients or historical personages, based on the 
position of currently transiting planets? I answer in the affirmative. This from the 
experience of comparing times when I locked down a rectification to the natal 
figure studied at that time. 
The most common connections I witnessed were between transiting planets and 
the figure's Moon or Mercury. Even the writing of the book was partly timed by 
Mercury transits. I completed Chapter 13's case study of Franklin Roosevelt at 
War during the Mercury Aquarius Ingress of January 2007, a Mercury return for 
FDR. During the following Mercury Pisces Ingress of February 2007, I 
completed most of Chapter 10's study of Lincoln's 1862 solar return - also a 
Mercury return for Lincoln. When Mercury went retrograde, I paused on that 
chapter, and completed it during March when Mercury made its last pass through 
Pisces after its direct station. 
Another valuable method for choosing magical times for the study of historical 
figures is to make use of the New Moon's sign position. A number of rectification 
cases were started following New Moon's whose sign matched the sign of the 
final Ascendant, Moon, or Sun position for the nativity studied. 
The future. Research in traditional astrology continues. It takes time for 
software to catch up with research findings and methods. Some valuable 
predictive methods, like profections, are difficult to use in rectification unless one 
has the facility to design an iterative rectification spreadsheet. Other methods, 
such as Directing through the Bounds, also await software upgrades which can 
handle their iterative calculations in rectification modules. Stay abreast with new 
research and advances in astrological software. 
