

===== PDF PAGE 136 (printed ~127) =====
124 
A RECTIFICATIONMANl'AL 
Considering the Sun, two elements favor the nocturnal series: Washington's 
fame during the Revolutionary War and the stronger influence of his mother 
relative to his father during his first decade of life. 
North Node and South Node. Did Washington's life match a period of increase 
and decrease corresponding to the North Node and South Node for the periods 
1771-74 and 1774-76 respectively? If so, this would favor the nocturnal Fidaria 
series and in all likelihood complete this exercise. Because both Nodes are not 
conjunct planets which sometimes trigger alternative delineations (see Chapter 12: 
Lunar Nodes and Eclipses), it appears safe to look for increase during 
Washington's 1771-1774 North Node period and decrease during 1774-1776. 
Shortly after the onset of Washington's North Node period on 22 February 
1771, the Committees of Correspondence were formed in the colonies. While 
Washington was no literary activist like Jefferson, the period nonetheless 
benefited him because political alliances solidified following the repeal of both 
Stamp and Townshend Acts. Success was relatively short-lived as the British 
quickly tired of colonists' demands and imposed the first Coercive Act on 31 
March 1774 just after the onset of Washington's South Node period on 22 
February 1774. The period between 1774 and 1776 was marked by divisive 
relations with the British who broke off diplomatic relations prior to the 
Revolutionary War. These events match the tempo of increase and decrease 
suggested by the three-year North Node and two-year South Node Fidaria periods. 
Together with events from the Sun's major period, the weight of the evidence 
favors the nocturnal Fidaria series for Washington. By making this choice, 
Washington's Sun is placed below the horizon. The interval between 6:47 AM 
sunrise and 5:41 PM sunset is excluded from consideration in the rectification. 
Revisiting the Nodes and Saturn in Washington's rectified figure. 
The final rectification places the North Node in the 11th of political alliances 
which matches the formation of the Committees of Correspondence. The South 
Node falls in the 5,h house of ambassadors and legates. This placement matches 
failed negotiations with the British. 
Reviewing the earlier Saturn main period for the nocturnal series during 1741- 
1752, Saturn falls in the 3rd of siblings and is the logical significator of 
Washington's half-brother Lawrence. He died during the Saturn-Moon sub period 
as the major Saturn period completed. Saturn's nature is to grant with difficulty, 
deny, delay, or to destroy. His half-brother died at the end of Saturn's period. 


===== PDF PAGE 137 (printed ~128) =====
chapter 7- planetary period methods 
125 
PLANETARY DAYS AND HOURS 
The principle that planets have power to act when they rule time filters down to 
specific days of the week and hours during each day. There is an astrological 
correspondence between planets and days of the week: Sunday/Sun; 
Monday/Moon; Tuesday/Mars; Wednesday/Mercury; Thursday/Jupiter; 
Friday/Venus; Saturday/Saturn. Lincoln's cabinet meetings were held Tuesdays 
and Fridays (Guelzo 2004: 130). With Mars placed in the 11th of political 
organizations ruled by Venus, the connection between Tuesday/Mars and 
Friday/Venus is obvious. Such combination is consistent with both these planets' 
influence on the 1 l,h house because for a President the signifies his cabinet 
and Lincoln met with his cabinet on those days. This provides additional 
confidence the basic configuration of Lincoln's figure is correct; otherwise Mars 
by position and Venus by rulership would influence other life affairs. 
This approach can be refined further by matching the timing of life events to 
the day's subdivisions by the system of planetary hours. 
Usefulness in Rectification. The practicality of using planetary days and 
hours in rectification is limited by the obvious need for detailed data; the likes of 
which would require access to personal diary records. Because of this limitation, 
for most cases, planetary days and hours are an impractical rectification tool. 


===== PDF PAGE 138 (printed ~129) =====
CHAPTER EIGHT 
Directions and Progressions 
Because directions have the ability to time major life events accurately within 
24 hours, they are rightly placed at the top of the predictive hierarchy. Not just 
directions of the significators to planets are of interest. Movement of the 
significators through the Egyptian bounds forms another set of life chapters which 
complement other Planetary Period Methods. The more recently developed 
secondary progressions and solar arc directions are also accurate, but rank lower 
on the predictive hierarchy. 
Chapter Summary 
Directing through the Bounds. The direction of a signiflcator through the 
Egyptian bounds causes that signiflcator to take on the characteristics of the active 
bound ruler. As a case study, Directing through the Bounds explains Theodore 
Roosevelt's powerful physical transfonnation following his childhood asthma. 
Primary Directions and the Primary Direction Sequence. A new solution to the 
problem of latitude is presented. The Primary Direction Sequence is comprised of 
a set of dates, each computed with all permutations of zero and full latitude for the 
signiflcator and promittor. Dates generated by sequences time the start and end of 
a series of events which historically have been attributed to a direction's orb of 
influence. Because the odds are very low that two separate events, often a year 
apart or more, could be precisely timed by a pair of primary directions; sequences 
are the long lost Holy Grail of Rectification. 
Abu Ma'shar's Theory of Distributors and Participators. Abu Ma'shar 
combines Directing through the Bounds and Primary Directions in an integrated 
predictive method. When a directed signiflcator falls in a specific bound, that 
bound ruler is named the Distributor. The most recently aspected promittor is 
named the Participator. Returning to Theodore Roosevelt as a case study, the 
combined effects of Distributors and Participators predict Roosevelt's 
reinvigorated political life in 1912 with formation of his Bull Moose Party and his 
subsequent political snub after President Wilson refused TR a WWI command. 


===== PDF PAGE 139 (printed ~130) =====
128 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
DIRECTING THROUGH THE BOUNDS (or "Circumambulations") 
The Method 
Directing through the Bounds is a special application of primary directions. 
The technique is similar to profections, where the significators are moved 
dynamically around the zodiac to make aspects to planets. But their method 
differs. Profecting at the annual rate moves the significators at the rate of 30 
degrees per year. Directing through the Bounds directs significators by primary 
motion through the Egyptian bounds. The Ascendant is directed by oblique 
ascension; Midheaven by right ascension, and the Sun, Moon, Part of Fortune, and 
SAN by methods suitable for interplanetary directions. By what method 
interplanetary directions should be calculated is open to debate. From the Greek 
era through the Renaissance three methods were widely used: Ptolemy, 
Regiomontanus, and Placidian mundo (a.k.a. 'mundane' directions). Current 
research suggests all significators should be directed by Ptolemy's method. 
Application. This is the procedure. Now what does it mean? Abu Ma'shar, in 
his treatise on solar returns, places Directing through the Bounds relatively high 
on his ladder of predictive methods. He specifically states the bound ruler of each 
directed significator should be emphasized before considering the solar return. 
For example, if the directed Ascendant of the natal chart falls in the bound of 
Venus/Pisces on the date the solar return is calculated, the state of Venus in the 
solar return is emphasized when delineating the return's Ascendant. This same 
exercise is repeated for the other significators. This approach emphasizes activity 
of the planet ruling the respective bound. 
Intrinsic Nature of each Bound. My findings indicate a two-step process is 
required. Before looking at the bound ruler, the planet/sign combination which 
comprises the bound itself requires consideration. Why? Chapter I demonstrated 
that the planet/sign combination for a specific bound adds its intrinsic nature to a 
planet placed in its bounds. Not only is this true on a static basis, but this study 
suggests a bound adds its intrinsic nature to any sisnificator which dynamically 
passes throush its degree range by primary motion. Andrew Jackson's chimney 
fire, which opened Part II, is one example. His home, signified by the 4th cusp, 
was detrimentally modified by the direction of the 4lh cusp through the bounds of 
malefics. Passage through the bound of Mars/Virgo signified repeated 
applications of heat which damaged the mortar's integrity; the bound of 
Saturn/Virgo, the actual crumbling of mortar which exposed flammable material. 
"Bounds" versus "Bound Rulers". Let's get this straight. Theodore 
Roosevelt's natal Ascendant is 17GE25. Falling between the degree range of 
IVGEOO'OO" and 23GE59'59", the Ascendant is placed in the "bound" of 
Mars/Gemini. Mars is the "bound ruler" and is placed at 18CP02 in the natal. As 
long as the directed Ascendant falls in the bound of Mars/Gemini, we can look to 
dynamic activity of Mars for additional testimony when judging the Ascendant. 


===== PDF PAGE 140 (printed ~131) =====
CHAPTER 8 - DIRECTIONS AND PROGRESSIONS 
129 
Case Study: Theodore Roosevelt's childhood asthma 
Among all the Presidents, surely there is no better example of physical 
transformation than Theodore Roosevelt. As a child, he was thin, skinny, and 
suffered from asthma. As an adult he was known for his manly physique and 
adventures which ranged from boxing to hunting safaris. Physical transformation 
can be traced to his father's strict physical fitness regimen imposed on the young 
Teedie after his father lost patience with his asthma attacks. The decision to 
implement the regimen was made on 6 September 1870. By the summer of 1872, 
Roosevelt's body mass had changed so rapidly he quickly outgrew his clothes. 
Asthma attacks appear to have ceased at this time (McCullough 1981, Chapter 5). 
This transformation can be explained by Directing through the Bounds. 
Bom with an Ascendant at 17GE25 in the bound of Mars/Gemini; the directed 
Ascendant moved to the bound of Satum/Gemini at 24GE00 on 15 June 1865 and 
the bound of Mars/Cancer at 00CA00 on 4 November 1871 at the age of 13y 8d. 
Roosevelt's bodily changes correspond to the directed Ascendant moving into 
the bound of Mars/Cancer. Asthma is caused by his Ascendant positioned in the 
bound of Mars/Gemini at birth; it lasted as long as the directed Ascendant fell in 
the bounds of either Mars or Saturn in Gemini. Gemini is assigned to the lungs, 
arms, and hands. The malefic bounds of Gemini interfere with lung capacity. 
Once the directed Ascendant left Gemini for Cancer, his physique changed from a 
gangly-Gemini appearance to a more full-bodied Cancer appearance. The bound 
of Mars/Cancer also signifies the harsh physical regiment imposed by his father. 
Though movement from the bound of one malefic to another is considered 
problematic by Abu Ma'shar (here from Satura/Gemini to Mars/Cancer), 
Roosevelt did leave his asthma behind for good when the directed Ascendant 
made this transition. 
Other examples 
John Tyler: Ascendant moved to the bound of Venus/Libra on 6 March 1861. 
While not a malefic term, this distribution occurred following his role in the failed 
Peace Conference of February 1861 and the outbreak of the Civil War on 12 April 
1861. Some historians consider the inability of Tyler to mediate differences at the 
Peace Conference a contributor to his death. If Venus/Libra adds diplomacy to 
the Ascendant's primary motivation, then the historical speculation makes sense. 
What can be worse than witnessing the onset of warfare from the sidelines as a 
failed diplomat? 
Ulysses Grant: Part of Fortune moved to the bound of Saturn/Libra on 31 July 
1861. This was immediately followed by his 13 August 1861 appointment to 
Brigadier General of Volunteers by Lincoln, launching his Civil War service. 
Grant's natal Part of Fortune, besieged by South Node and Mars in the 4th house is 


===== PDF PAGE 141 (printed ~132) =====
130 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
best delineated as wealth from the destruction of Confederate open enemies in the 
homeland. The POF changeover from the bound of Saturn/Virgo to Saturn/Libra 
produced radical improvement in Grant's fortunes. 
Chester Arthur: Sun moved to the bound of Jupiter/Sagittarius on 19 June 
1882. Moving from Saturn/Scorpio to Jupiter Sagittarius signified dramatic 
change from paranoia to unbridled optimism. This changeover occurred during a 
political season when popular backlash against the spoils system caused large 
Republican losses in the November 1882 midterm elections. That Arthur, once a 
firm advocate for bossism, political assessments, and the spoils system; would 
turn his back on his past and sign the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act on 16 
January 1883 dumbfounded his former supporters and has puzzled historians 
since. I suggest Jupiter/Sagittarius as the Sun's Distributor caused Arthur to leave 
behind the dubious ethics of the spoils system; surely a Scorpio activity. 
Franklin Roosevelt: Sun moved to the bound of Mercurv/Pisces on 19 June 
1921. While the Moon is FDR's hTlaj, Sun/Aquarius/b
111 is still delineated as weak 
circulation in the legs. Moving from the bound of Jupiter to Mercury in Pisces 
(Mercury in fall) appears to make FDR more susceptible to polio which he 
contracted on 10 August 1921. In addition, his directed MC changed bounds from 
Jupiter/Cancer to Saturn/Cancer on 2 August 1921, eight days before the illness. 
Dwight Eisenhower: Midheaven moved to the bound of Jupiter/Aries on 12 
May 1943. This was three days before Eisenhower completed the takeover of 
Tunis as the culmination of Operation Torch. Eisenhower had predicted to 
Roosevelt six months earlier he would capture Tunis by this time. 
Richard Nixon: Ascendant moved to the bound of Mars/Scorpio on 8 July 
1966. Nixon became angry on 26 February 1970 when he learned that French 
President Georges Pompidou, in the US on a state visit, was booed and jeered by 
crowds protesting his decision to sell Mirage jet fighters to Libya. Nixon stated: 
"This is unconscionable . . . The fucking Jews think they can rule the world ... I 
don't want any more Jews in here to talk about the Middle East" (Reeves 2001, 
170). In response, Nixon postponed delivery of US military aircraft to Israel. 
And when he read that both NY Governor Nelson Rockefeller and NY Mayor 
John Lindsay planned to boycott the France-America Society dinner honoring 
Pompidou, Nixon arranged not only to attend the dinner but ordered his staff to 
cut off all possible federal discretionary funding to New York City as a follow-up 
to the Pompidou dinner. This incident was timed by the following direction: 
10-Jul-1966. PT dex. sex tile Mercury d. => ASC. 
Mercury/Capricom/S
111 of diplomacy and entertainment ruled by 
Satum/Taurus/9th of foreign affairs can be delineated as a ruthless diplomatic ploy 
because of Mercury's conjunction to Jupiter/Capricorn (naked ambition) and 
Mars/Sagittarius (bluster) by antiscia. But it is placement of the directed 


===== PDF PAGE 142 (printed ~133) =====
CHAPTER 8 - DIRECTIONS AND PROGRESSIONS 
131 
Ascendant in the bounds of Mars/Scorpio which adds another layer of delineation 
which better describes the incident. True Nixon exemplified the revengeful, 
fighting style of Mars in Scorpio. But there is a more subtle mundane connection 
to both Israel and France. In a separate research study, the Taurus-Scorpio axis 
appears the underlying cause of Mideast conflict based on mundane choreography 
rules. Taurus is assigned to Israel; Scorpio to most Mideast countries. This is an 
important mundane topic which deserves an in depth treatment in another space. 
If my choreography is correct, the bounds suggest Nixon's anti-Israel actions were 
taken because of this change in directed Ascendant from Libra to Scorpio which 
opposes Israel's sign of Taurus. Nixon also has Saturn placed in Taurus, a 
disruption to Taurus-signified issues; and the same Saturn/Taurus rules 
Mercury/Capricorn. As for France, the directed Midheaven fell in the bound of 
Jupiter/Leo at the time of this incident, favorably influencing Pompidou's 
reputation in Nixon's mind. In mundane choreography, Leo is assigned to France. 
Nixon's directed Ascendant remained in the bound of Mars/Scorpio through the 
Watergate affair until the changeover to Venus on 18 December 1974. 
Usefulness in Rectification 
In theory, incidents of bad health, accidents, and surgeries are more likely to 
happen when the directed Ascendant or the directed HTlaj is in the bound of a 
malefic, changes from a benefic to malefic bound, or changes from one malefic 
bound to another malefic bound. 
Because this system defines periods and not specific dates, using Directing 
through the Bounds to rectify a figure requires either access to an extensive 
database or the luck that a major life event occurs exactly at the changeover. 
Because many malefic events occur during the distribution of a malefic, and not 
necessarily at the changeover, Directing through the Bounds can only provide a 
rough guide for natal rectification projects. Mundane rectification of National 
Horoscopes is a different matter. With a greater number of human participants, a 
sufficient number of tangible events do occur which makes observation of 
Distributor changeovers possible. (See America is Born, Chapter 6). 


===== PDF PAGE 143 (printed ~134) =====
132 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
THE PRIMARY DIRECTION SEQUENCE 
The vagaries of latitude. In my opinion, practical application of primary 
directions has been hampered by errors in the treatment of latitude5. Because the 
calculation of a direction with differing latitude assumptions can easily vary by a 
year or more (especially with high latitude bodies like the Moon), matching 
directions to events has been severely compromised. And if one is lucky enough 
to find an event match to a calculated direction, there is no guarantee the 
particular event was not timed by some other predictive technique like Profections 
or Fidaria. If one considers the inaccuracy of many astronomical tables of the 
Medieval Era and the lengthy time involved in manual calculation of directions; 
it's a wonder that primary directions were ever developed. 
Introducing the Primary Direction Sequence 
The Holv Grail of Rectification. Hands down, the most exciting finding of this 
research project has been the discovery that the calculation of a set of directions, 
one with full latitude and one with zero latitude, matches a set of events which if 
not directly connected are consistent with the delineation of both significator and 
promittor. 
Definition: Primary Direction Sequence 
A set of dates, computed with all latitude combinations between significator and 
promittor, which defines a sequence of events listed in chronological order. 
For Ascendant-planet and Midheaven-planet directions, a pair of dates is 
computed. The first direction is computed with the full latitude of the planet. The 
second direction assumes the planet has zero latitude. 
Because the Sun has zero latitude, only a single direction is computed for the Sun. 
For interplanetary directions, four dates are computed: 
(1) zero latitude of significator and zero latitude of promittor, 
(2) zero latitude of significator and full latitude of promittor, 
(3) full latitude of significator and full latitude of promittor, and 
(4) full latitude of significator and zero latitude of promittor. 
5 For a lively debate on latitude, see Morin (1994: 41-59). 


===== PDF PAGE 144 (printed ~135) =====
chapter 8 - directions and progressions 
133 
Findings of other researchers. Two other researchers of primary directions note 
similar findings. Rumen Kolev computes a pair of Sun - Mars directions for 
Adoph Hitler's figure which bracket Hitler's decline during 1908-1910 
culminating with homelessness (Kolev 2005[?]; 23). The difference in Kolev's 
approach is that one direction is computed using direct motion; the other, 
converse. Under my definition, while allowing both direct and converse 
directions, I do not mix direct and converse motion within a single sequence. 
Jerry Makransky also reported that interchanging the significator and promittor for 
mundane conjunctions and oppositions in the Campanus and Regiomontanus 
systems yielded a pair of events or time periods which were linked in some way 
(McKransky 1998). Though I did not perform the exact types of directions that 
Makransky describes, it appears my findings are similar in spirit. 
Locking Down a Rectification with Primary Direction Sequences 
Low odds against a random finding. The value in primary direction sequences 
for rectification is based on the extremely low odds of finding pairs of events, 
sometimes months or years apart, which match start and end dates for a primary 
direction sequence. It's fairly easy to find close matches of individual directions 
to a smattering of events. But matching several pairs of events to sequences of 
Ascendant and Midheaven directions is a mathematical feat which is virtually 
impossible to achieve unless the rectified birth time is accurate to the second. 
And not just a second of time. For some Presidents with a large event database, it 
was possible to narrow the birth time to one second of degree. Such is the case for 
FDR, whose proposed Ascendant of 20V157'52" implies an accuracy of a fraction 
of one second of a minute of time. Such precision is unheard of in astrological 
circles. I propose this type of accuracy is possible with sequences. 
Locking down a rectification. In the rectification database, both individual 
directions and primary direction sequences are presented as supporting evidence. 
As Chapter 14: Preparing the Event Database states, not all events are recorded or 
available to researchers. It is impossible to match a set of events to a sequence 
under such conditions. This accounts for the inclusion of single directions. Also 
note because the Sun has zero latitude, by definition there is but a single date 
computed when directing the Sun to the angles. 1 use the notation *LOCK* to 
signify either Sun-angle directions or primary direction sequences with 
outstanding accuracy. These locked-down directions capture the AHA! moments 
of the rectification process. 


===== PDF PAGE 145 (printed ~136) =====
134 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
Integration of Directing through the Bounds and Primary Directions 
Abu Ma'shar's Theory of Distributors and Participators. In his treatise on solar 
returns, Abu Ma'shar sets forth an elaborate method of combining Directing 
through the Bounds and Primary Directions (Abu Ma'shar 1999: 1-40). In his 
terminology, he names the bound ruler the Distributor and the most recent planet 
aspecting the significator by primary direction the Participator. Further 
classifying Distributors and Participators as benefics or malefics, he then proceeds 
to outline every possible permutation. For example, moving from the bound of a 
benefic to another benefic is good; from the bound of a benefic to a malefic is bad; 
from the bound of one malefic to another malefic is quite bad. Then he overlays 
the benefic/malefic status of the Participator. So if there has been a change of one 
benefic bound to another benefic, yet the Participator is a malefic; there is a 
degradation of the effect. 
What is important to remember about this system are the planetary periods 
established by Distributors and Participators. As stated at the beginning of this 
chapter, Distributors set up a period of time when the relevant significator is 
predisposed to activity consistent with the delineation of the planet/sign 
combination for the respective bound. To recap, because Mars/Gemini and 
Saturn/Gemini interfere with lung capacity, Theodore Roosevelt was more prone 
to asthma when his Ascendant was directed through these bounds than at any 
other time in his life. Pinpointing the exact risk time requires recourse to other 
predictive methods; e.g., directions, profections, returns, and transits. 
In addition to the Distributor, the Participator also sets up its own planetary 
period from the time the participating direction is computed until the next planet 
aspects the significator by primary motion and forms the next direction. 
Introducing the primary direction sequence requires a modification of this rule. 
By considering the effect of latitude, a series of events contained within the 
bookends of a sequence date range need to be treated collectively as one event in 
application of Abu Ma'shar's method. Events occurring during a sequence have a 
lasting effect on the relevant significator until the next set of sequence events take 
over. Of course there are exceptions. Directions of the Sun to the angles generate 
only one direction because the Sun has zero latitude; no change is required from 
the original model. However when primary direction sequences are lengthy date 
ranges (which happens for high latitude planets), sequences may overlap and 
prevent a clean transfer from one participator to another. Then there is the 
existence of converse directions. My only suggestion to these conundrums is to 
remember that predictive astrology is additive and not a blend. Consider each 
effect separately; only then can measurements be considered jointly prior to 
rendering a final judgment. 


===== PDF PAGE 146 (printed ~137) =====
CHAPTER 8- DIRECTIONS AND PROGRESSIONS 
135 
Case Study: The Career of Theodore Roosevelt 
Distributors. Roosevelt's career and reputation signified by the Midheaven can 
be divided into three sections based on the sign of the directed MC. (Table 12). 
Aquarius. 27-Oct-I858 to 1 l-Nov-1865. As a child, Roosevelt was a 
naturalist and declared his intention to be a scientist at the age of seven. This 
corresponds to the year 1865 when the Saturn/Aquarius Distribution concluded. 
The combination of the fixed air sign Aquarius with its methodical ruler Saturn is 
a delineation match to science and TR's career interests as a child. 
Pisces. 12-NoV'1865 to 8-Oct-I893. Roosevelt is not remembered for his 
career pursuits through his mid-SO's. The son of a wealthy family, his reputation 
was defined more by his family's wealth, activities, his two marriages, and 
escapades in the Badlands. His appointment to the Civil Service Commission by 
President Cleveland in 1889 was a step up but hardly one worthy of Presidential 
fodder. Typical of the period was an event timed by this Moon-MC direction 
falling under the influence Jupiter/Pisces as Distributor. 
23-NoV'1879. dex. trine Moon (l=MO) d. => MC. 
On 22 November 1879, Roosevelt held a lunch in the honor of Alice Lee and 
her family at the Porcellian Club after Alice turned down his marriage proposal on 
20 June 1879. She agreed to marry Roosevelt shortly thereafter. As Distributor, 
Jupiter/Pisces defined Roosevelt's social reputation by a philosophy of 
compassion which undoubtedly facilitated his matrimonial intentions. 
Aries. 9-Oct-1893 to death. Not until Roosevelt's directed MC entered the 
sign of Aries did he attain any career positions worthy of national attention. With 
his appointment as NY Police Commissioner during May 1895, Roosevelt's 
reputation was quickly defined by a prosecutorial, head busting style with his 
enforcement of banned liquor sales on Sundays. During the Spanish-American 
War, Roosevelt led a successful charge on San Juan Hill which gave him iconic 
status. Both activities are consistent with the head-first aggressiveness of 
Jupiter/Aries. 
Jumping ahead to the last two distributors in Aries, consider that Roosevelt 
entered the Presidential race against his former protege Taft on 22 February 1912, 
one month prior to the onset of the Mars/Aries Distributor which redefined his 
career/reputation as an aggressive fighter for the Progressive Movement. After 
the outbreak of World War 1, Roosevelt made the request to recruit and lead a 
division of infantry in Europe between February and April 1917, a few months 
after the MC Distributor changed to Saturn/Aries. President Woodrow Wilson 
refused such a request; Roosevelt's reputation was harmed as a frustrated fighter. 
This diminished reputation is consistent with Saturn/Aries delineated as the 
frustration of war. 


===== PDF PAGE 147 (printed ~138) =====
136 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
Case Study - Continued 
Effect of Distributors on Participators 
As another example of the effect of the MC Distributor on participating 
primary directions, consider the two Jupiter-MC primary direction sequences: 
Dispute with Marquis de Mores (see p. 567 for details). 
Distributor: Mars/Pisces 
Participatorf H: 30-Jul-1885. PT. dex. square Jupiter d. => MC. 
Participator^): 4-Nov-1885. PT. dex. square Jupiter (l=JU) d. => MC. 
Libel Case against George A. Newett 
Distributor: Mars/Aries 
Participator(l): 31-Mar-1913. PT. dex. sextile Jupiter d. => MC. 
Participator^): 3-Jul-1913. PT. dex. sextile Jupiter (I=JU) d. => MC. 
During 1885, Roosevelt was involved in a dispute with the cattle baron Marquis 
de Mores. The incident included threat of a duel but the matter was eventually 
dropped. In 1913, Roosevelt was involved in another legal dispute; this time a 
libel case against George A. Newett, publisher, for printing the remark that 
"Roosevelt gets drunk, and that not infrequently, and all his intimates know it" in 
his newspaper The Iron Ore ('Roosevelt's Libel Case Begins Monday,' NYT, 
May 24, 1913, p. 9). Roosevelt won the case handily. Both events are a match to 
a Jupiter direction because Jupiter/Gemini in the 7th of conflict placed in the 1st 
means Roosevelt attracts legal conflict from open enemies from statements which 
are blown out of proportion. As Jupiter's ruler, Mercury/Scorpio signifies the 
caustic nature of comments made in both cases. Placed in the 6th house of 
domesticated animals, the 1885 case is an excellent match to Marquis de Mores 
case because Mores was a cattle baron. 
Now consider the effects of the Distributors on each of these events. For the 
1885 event, Mars/Pisces signifies the willingness to sacrifice through martial acts. 
Threat of a duel is consistent with this delineation. For the 1913 libel suit, recall 
that Roosevelt began his Presidential bid one month after the Distribution changed 
to Mars/Aries. The libelous comments made by Newett were made in 1912 
during the heat of Roosevelt's campaign as head of the 'Bull Moose Party.' In 
this way the 1913 libel case was directed tied to events set off by the Distributor 
changeover to Mars/Aries the prior year. 


===== PDF PAGE 148 (printed ~139) =====
Chapter 8 - directions and progressions 137 
Table 12. Midheaven Distributors and Participators, Theodore Roosevelt. 
Distributor 
Aspect 
Participator 
Latitude 
27 Oct 1858 
20AQ-Mars 
19 Jan 1861 
25AQ-Saturn 
12 Nov 1865 
OPI-Venus 
4 June 1868 
sinister 
trine Mercury 
ME 
28 Aug 1868 
sinister 
trine Mercury 
0 
15 Dec 1869 
sinister 
trine Sun 
0 
19 May 1872 
conj North Node 
0 
1 Mar 1877 
12Pl-Jupiter 
23 Nov 1879 
dexter 
trine Moon 
MO 
17 Nov 1880 
16PI-Mercury 
2 June 1881 
dexter 
trine Moon 
0 
13 Oct 1882 
sinister 
sextile Mars 
0 
21 Dec 1882 
sinister 
square Venus 
0 
20 July 1883 
sinister 
sextile Mars 
MA 
27 Aug 1883 
19PI-Mars 
j 28 Oct1884 
sinister 
square Venus 
VE 
4 Nov 1885 
dexter 
square Jupiter 
0 
| 30 July 1885 
dexter 
square Jupiter 
JU 
6 Dec 1891 
28P1-Saturn 
9 Oct 1893 
OAR-Jupiter 
10 April 1899 
6AR-Venus 
13-Apr-1904 
dexter 
trine Saturn 
SA 
2-Jul-1904 
dexter 
trine Saturn 
0 
18-Oct-1904 
12AR-Mercury 
7-Jul-1907 
dexter 
square Moon 
MO 
16-Jan-1909 
dexter 
square Moon 
0 
2-Jun-1910 
sinister 
square Mars 
0 
10-Aug-1910 
sinister 
trine Venus 
0 
1 -Mar-1911 
sinister 
square Mars 
MA 
24-Mar-1912 
20AR-Mars 
24-May-1912 
sinister 
trine Venus 
VE 
31-Mar-1913 
dexter 
sextile Jupiter 
0 
3-Jul-1913 
dexter 
sextile Jupiter 
JU 
4-Dec-1916 
25AR-Saturn 


===== PDF PAGE 149 (printed ~140) =====
138 
A RECTIFICATION MANUAL 
PROGRESSIONS AND SOLAR ARC DIRECTIONS 
Progressions in Brief. Compared to primary directions, based on the diurnal 
movement of planets rising in the east and setting in the west; secondary 
progressions are based on the clockwise motion of planets through the degrees of 
the zodiac. Calculation of secondary progressions assumes that one day 
corresponds to one year of life. For example, the secondary progressed chart for 
age 24 is computed by examining planet positions 24 days after birth. Together 
with transits, secondary progressions make up the two most popular types of 
predictive techniques in contemporary use, assuredly because of their ease in 
calculation relative to primary directions. 
Emphasis on Progressed Moon and Sun. Because the speed of the outer planets 
moves so slowly, much of this technique is focused on the faster moving 
progressed Moon and Sun. This research project confirms the validity of the 
secondary progressed Moon, primarily used as one of three methods to time the 
promise of the solar return (See Chapter 10: Solar Returns: Delineation and 
Prediction). The progressed Sun as the base measurement for the solar arc 
method of directing also has merit. Aspects made by progressions of planets to 
the significators occur so rarely they are not emphasized in my approach to 
rectification or prediction. Such is the power of other medieval techniques 
including Fidaria and Profections that I publicly admit to computing only a 
handful of progressed charts in the last few years. They are not a mainstay of my 
practice. 
Solar Arc Directions. In the solar arc method of directing, the distance between 
the natal Sun and the progressed Sun, for a given date, is named the Solar Arc. 
This solar arc distance is added to each planet or body in the natal figure. Aspects 
between these adjusted planet positions and natal significators are computed and 
delineated just as for primary directions. For instance, Mars square Ascendant by 
solar arc is interpreted the same way as Mars square Ascendant by primary 
direction. Solar arc directions are a relatively new technique, arriving on the 
scene in the early 20th century promoted by both Hamburg and Cosmobiological 
Schools of astrology (Tyl 2001, 17-20). 
Relationship between Solar Arc and Primary Directions. While computing 
Dwight Eisenhower's rectification, it struck me quite odd the direction of ASC 
opposed Mars timed the Pearl Harbor attack bv solar arc yet the same ASC 
opposed Mars timed Eisenhower's own response to the attack through his own 
travel and military operations during WWII bv primary direction. 
Woodrow Wilson's figure showed a similar configuration for the outbreak of 
WWI. For Wilson, an ASC opposed Mars timed Archduke Ferdinand's 
assassination bv solar arc and the same ASC opposed Mars timed Wilson's failed 
negotiations at the Paris Peace talks of 1919 bv primary direction. 
